Microfocused Ultrasound
for Skin Tightening
Karol A. Gutowski, MD*
INTRODUCTION
The continued patient demand for nonsurgical and
minimal downtime facial rejuvenation has resulted
in more use of injectable neurotoxins and fillers,
and skin resurfacing and tightening treatments. Tis-
sue heating either by radiofrequency (RF) or micro-
focused ultrasound (MFU) can be part of the overall
treatment plan to tighten skin and even elevate
facial structures. MFU generates heat in deeper
dermis and subcutaneous tissue, leading to new
collagen synthesis and subsequent skin tightening
and elevation.
COLLAGEN DENATURATION AND
NEOCOLLAGENESIS
When collagen is exposed to 60C to 65C, it
becomes denatured. One study showed that new
collagen synthesis is observed after 30 days and
another study showed new collagen and elastin
synthesis at 10 weeks, along with deposition of
new hyaluronic acid.1,2
MECHANISM OF ACTION
Ultrasound medical devices use sound waves for
diagnostic imaging or medical treatments. Higher
ultrasound frequencies have more superficial tis-
sue effects and lower frequencies have deeper
tissue effects. When ultrasound waves are micro-
focused to a point in living tissue, molecular
vibration results and heat is generated creating
well-defined thermal injury zones at predeter-
mined depths while leaving the surrounding tissue
unaffected. At the resulting tissue temperatures,
collagen contraction, and denaturation is seen
and neocollagenesis is stimulated.
MFU is different from RF energy in that it can be
microfocused to target deeper tissue without
affecting more superficial tissue. Unlike RF energy,
MFU can heat deeper tissue to between 60C and
70C without damaging the skin. For an RF device
to achieve high temperatures, surface cooling is
needed to protect the skin.
ULTHERA MICROFOCUSED ULTRASOUND
SYSTEM
The Ulthera system (Ultherapy) was approved by
the US Food and Drug Administration in 2009 for
noninvasive eyebrow elevation but is routinely
used for panfacial and submental treatments.
Depending on the device settings, the target tissue
can be set to variable depths:
 1.5 mm
 3.0 mm, which targets deep dermis
 4.5 mm, which targets the superficial muscular
aponeurotic system (SMAS) and platysma
Disclosures: The author does not have any financial interests or relationships with the product manufacturers.
Division of Plastic Surgery, University of Illinois, 908 West Armitage, Chicago, IL 60614, USA
* Corresponding author. 820 South Wood Street, Suite 515 CSN, Chicago, IL 60612-7316.
E-mail address: Karol@DrGutowski.com
KEYWORDS
 Noninvasive skin tightening  Ulthera  Microfocused ultrasound  Thermal injury zones
KEY POINTS
 Noninvasive skin tightening is possible in one treatment session using Ulthera microfocused
ultrasound.
 Results may not be seen until 3 to 6 months after treatment.
 Some patients may not see improvement after treatment depending on individual patient treatment
response and the energy delivery protocols used.
Clin Plastic Surg 43 (2016) 577–582
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cps.2016.03.012
0094-1298/16/$ – see front matter  2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
plasticsurgery.theclinics.com
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on July 27, 
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Ulthera system delivers transcutaneous
MFU energy from an operator-controlled hand
piece (Fig. 1) and a monitor allows direct visualiza-
tion (Fig. 2) of where the energy will be delivered
so that specific structures such as bone can be
avoided. The focal energy delivery in given in
predetermined “lines” results in discrete intervals
between 1 mm3 coagulation zones that promote
healing.
INDICATIONS
Although the currently approved indications are
listed below, other facial and nonfacial areas
have been treated:
 Lift eyebrows
 Lift submental tissue (chin and neck)
 Improve lines and wrinkles in de´ collete´
HISTOLOGIC STUDIES
An early prototype Ulthera device was used on
the lateral cheek region in patients who would
be undergoing a surgical rhytidectomy within
12 weeks of treatment.3 Skin histology showed
consistent and reproducible thermal injury zones
in the dermis, without injury to the epidermis,
which was absent by 12 weeks. Another study4
showed more dermal collagen in the reticular
dermis (24% increase) 2 months after treatment
resulting in a mean increase in dermal thick-
ening from 1.32 to 1.63 mm. Elastic fibers of the
upper and lower dermis were more parallel and
straighter.
TREATMENT TIMES
Treatment times for the full face and neck are
generally less than 90 minutes, but vary depend-
ing on provider experience, aggressiveness of
protocol, patient comfort, and treatment surface
area.
 Face – 30 to 60 minutes
 Neck – 30 to 45 minutes
PRETREATMENT
 Topical betacaine/lidocaine/procaine cream
for 60 minutes5
 Topical
lidocaine/tetracaine
(7%/7%)
for
45 minutes6
SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
Face and Neck
A prospective rater-blinded study of the forehead,
temples, cheeks, submental region, and side of
neck measured outcomes at 90 days.6 Probes
used were 4 MHz, 4.5-mm focal depth (source
energy 0.75–1.2 J), 7 MHz, 4.5-mm focal depth
(source energy 0.75–1.05 J), and 7 MHz, 3.0-mm
focal depth (source energy 0.4–0.63 J). Ultrasound
pulses were administered every 1.5 mm along
each treatment line with 3 to 5 mm between treat-
ment lines. Thirty of 35 patients (86%) had a clini-
cally significant improvement in brow elevation
(mean, 1.7 mm). Unfortunately, the imaging used
in the study design did not allow for conclusions
to be made regarding improvement of other treat-
ment areas.
Periorbital Region
As with any energy device, extreme care is needed
when treating the thinner periocular skin. Direct
treatment of eyelids over the eye itself is not indi-
cated. Upper eyelid improvement can be seen
after treatment of the forehead and brow owing
to brow elevation.
Two studies of lower eyelid treatments, both in
Asian patients, showed improvement in infraorbital
laxity. Quantitative improvement was seen after
targeting the lower eyelid skin and orbital septum
with 1.5-mm and 3.0-mm probes in a small series
of 7 patients.6 A larger study of 15 patients7,8 also
showed improvement in most patients. Histologic
analysis confirmed increased collagen and elastin
fibers in the reticular dermis, but there was no
significant change in the epidermis.
Nasolabial Folds and Jaw Line
A prospective, blinded evaluator study of 22
patients using 7.5- and 4.4-MHz hand pieces,
delivering energy to a focal depth of 3.0 and
4.5 mm with linear arrays spaced in parallel at
3 mm, evaluated the nasolabial folds and jaw
line.4 Two months after treatment of the face and
Fig. 1. Patient treatment with Ulthera microfocused
ultrasound hand piece.
Gutowski
578
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on July 27, 
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

submental area, all patients demonstrated nasola-
bial fold and jaw line improvement, 77% and 73%
of patients subjectively reported “much improve-
ment,” respectively.
Superficial Musculoaponeurotic System
A
cadaver
study
of
transcutaneous
Ulthera
energy delivery in the face demonstrated thermal
injury zones in the SMAS along with SMAS
contraction proportional to the amount of energy
delivered.9 The epidermis and sub-SMAS struc-
tures were not affected. These findings sug-
gest that not only dermal contraction, but also
deeper support structural improvement contrib-
utes to the aesthetic improvements seen after
treatment.
Buttocks
A single study evaluated ultrasound skin tightening
and smoothing of the buttocks.5 Using transducers
with 3.0- and 4.5-mm focal depths, an area of
twenty-five 1-inch by 1-inch squares was treated.
The mean number of treatment lines delivered to
the right buttock was 973 (the left buttock served
as a control). In most cases, the highest energy
levels were not used owing to patient preference.
Standardized blinded assessment and patient
satisfaction was measured. Although 17 of 19
patients (89%) showed objective improvement at
180 days, only 68% expressed overall satisfaction
and most would not recommend it to family or
friends. Furthermore, pain scores were high and
may have limited the amount of energy delivered
to the treatment area. It is possible that improved
treatment protocols and patient selection may yield
better results.
Arms, Thigh, and Knee Skin
Because skin aging is not limited to the face,
patients (usually women) commonly seek skin tight-
ening of the upper arms, inner thighs, and the area
just above the knees. One small study included 6
of each of these areas using 1 (single plane) or 2
(dual treatment depths) treatment passes.10 After
6 months, blinded assessors found more skin lifting
effect in the upper arms and knees than in the inner
thighs. The dual treatment depth areas had slightly
better clinical improvement scores. Eighty-one
percent of patients were highly satisfied and all pa-
tients opted to have more treatments at the same
site or at other sites. Despite the reported favorable
Fig. 2. Ulthera screen display. The upper one-third of the screen shows the depth of tissue treatment.
Microfocused Ultrasound for Skin Tightening
579
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on July 27, 
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

results, the published before and after images show
modest improvements.
Non-Caucasian Ethnic Groups and Skin Types
Most studies were on Caucasian skin types. Chan
and colleagues11 reported on 49 Chinese patients
with Fitzpatrick skin types III and IV followed for up
to 6 months. As in other studies, most patients had
transient erythema and edema. Two cases of
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation were seen
on the forehead at 1 month.
Of 22 Korean patients with Fitzpatrick skin types
III to VI treated with Ulthera, 2 developed whitish
wheals or striations but no further details were
provided.4
Pain and Comfort Management
One frequent complaint of the Ulthera system
is pain during treatment. Moderate to severe
pain may limit the amount of energy delivered,
decrease
the
treatment
areas,
and
increase
treatment duration times. Topical anesthetics
can provide some relief, but when not used,
54% of patients reported their pain as being
“severe.” Specific protocols for comfort manage-
ment during treatment have not been developed
but
the
following
options
are
available
and
include:
 Nitrous oxide gas
 Oralnonsteroidalantiinflammatorymedications
 Oral narcotics
 Oral anxiolytics
 Topical anesthetics
 Injectable anesthetic nerve blocks
 Distraction techniques
 Cool air devices and fans
 Precooled ultrasound gel
These modalities may be used alone or in com-
bination depending on patient tolerance and clin-
ical judgment.
Based on small pilot trials,12 the following was
found during Ulthera treatments:
 No difference in pain relief between 800 mg of
ibuprofen versus 10 mg hydrocodone/500 mg
acetaminophen
given
60
minutes
before
treatment
 No difference in pain relief between topical
liposomal lidocaine and a placebo control
 Lower
energy
treatment
levels
had
less
discomfort that higher energy levels without
a difference in clinical outcome at 180 days
Although inflammation is a necessary component
of neocollagenesis after Ulthera treatment, it is
unknown if chronic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
medication use may interfere with the final outcome.
Recovery and Down Time
Other than the mild tissue reactions described
elsewhere in this paper, the Ulthera system can
be considered to have no down time and a minimal
recovery period. No specific aftercare is needed.
Side Effects and Complications
Most published studies reported only mild side
effects, typically mild erythema and edema that
usually resolves after 2 days but no longer than
7 days.6 However, some patients reported tran-
sient bruising, skin pigment changes,9 and neuro-
pathic pain for up to 3 months, after treatment.
A small group of patients also reported numbness
of the jawline, which resolved within 3 weeks.4
A review of the literature focusing on the safety
of MFU confirmed that side effects are generally
mild and transient in nature.13
RESULTS
Collagen contraction immediately after treatment
may result in an initial tissue “lift.” There is also
mild edema that contributes to the early aesthetic
improvement seen by patients. However, the heat-
induced collagen synthesis and remodeling can
persist for up to 1 year. A typical result is shown
in Fig. 3. Because ideal candidates tend to have
mild to moderate aging, those with more severe
aging, sagging skin, and platysmal bands are likely
to be better served by surgical treatment.
As with any noninvasive aesthetic treatment, not
all patients and clinicians see an improvement.
A 2010 study by Ulthera, 51 of 70 patients (73%)
had a quantitative improvement in tissue lift in
the submental areas after 3 months. Of those 51
patients, 84% (43 patients) had a qualitative
improvement as determined by blinded assessors.
Therefore, the overall positive response was 61%.
Overall patient satisfaction was 67%. Because the
energy density settings were about one-half of the
density recommended, it is likely that a higher
response is possible if more aggressive treatment
protocols are used. A follow-up study of 64 pa-
tients found 64% to 79% of patients reporting
some degree of improvement between 2 and
6 months after treatment. The group that included
jowl treatment had lower satisfaction scores.14
One independent study15 of 10 patients with
standardized photography and blinded, experi-
enced clinician evaluators found that 2 of the
patients (20%) did not show any improvement. Pa-
tient self-assessment found 1 patient (10%) who
Gutowski
580
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on July 27, 
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reported no improvement and 2 patients (20%)
who reported only mild improvement. However,
treatment protocols, the amount of energy deliv-
ered, and individual patient factors make general-
izations on expected outcomes difficult. Older
patients with less “healing potential” may not
respond as well as younger patients.
In the largest Ulthera sponsored study with
qualitative
and
quantitative
imaging
assess-
ment,16 58% of 93 patients had improvement in
skin laxity after 3 months, as determined by
blinded reviewers. In patients with a body mass in-
dex of greater than 30 kg/m2, 55% of patients did
not have a change, compared with 12% of
patients with a body mass index of 30 mg/kg2
or less. At the same time, 66% of patients
perceived an improvement in skin laxity of their
lower half of the face and neck. All patients
received a superficial and deep treatment of
approximately 295 lines. It is possible that a higher
treatment density (more lines) and assessment at
6 to 9 months may have shown more favorable
responses.
Duration of Results
Although no skin tightening procedure can claim
permanent results, the long-term outcomes of
energy-derived skin tightening devices is lacking.
Surgical procedures (face and neck lifts), however,
have demonstrated continued improvement at up
to 10 years.
Physician Oversight
Physicians may administer the treatments them-
selves, but in most cases, nurses or trained
aestheticians provide the service. Specifics of
oversight regarding patient evaluation and physi-
cian availability vary according to local regulations.
TREATMENT PROTOCOL VARIATION
Because not all patients may not respond to treat-
ments, there is room for increasing the treatment
line density. Experienced Ulthera user consensus
group participants reported high rates of efficacy
when using 600 to 800 lines per treatment. Treat-
ment densities of up to 1500 lines have been
used, but there seems to be little clinical return
after 1200 to 1500 lines.17 Therefore, physician
assessment and a patient-specific treatment plan
should be done for each patient.
Other Treatment Options
Ulthera is only 1 option in the facial rejuvenation
armamentarium.
 Brow elevation can be achieved with neuro-
modulators and injectable fillers
 Facial and neck skin tightening can also be
achieved by a variety of energy devices,
including RF
 Injectable fillers and fat grafts can result in mid
and lower face elevation
 Lower facial skin laxity and jowls have been
treated
with
conservative
laser-assisted
liposuction
 Mid and lower face elevation can be achieved
with percutaneous barbed “threads”; how-
ever, the results are temporary
 Submental fullness can be reduced with
deoxycholic acid (Kybella) injections
 Submental fat reduction and skin contraction
can be achieved with traditional liposuction
(with possibly enhanced results using laser-
assisted liposuction)
More invasive and surgical options should al-
ways be discussed with patients as more severe
Fig. 3. A 45-year-old woman before (left) and after (right) ulthera treatment of lower face and submental region.
Microfocused Ultrasound for Skin Tightening
581
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on July 27, 
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

aging may be less responsive to noninvasive
treatments.
SUMMARY
MFU is a noninvasive facial skin tightening tech-
nology with minimal down time that can com-
plement other noninvasive treatments. However,
variability in patient response needs to be consid-
ered and future improvements in treatment proto-
cols may improve response rates. Outcomes may
be better in patients with mild to moderate facial
aging and in those with a body mass index of
30 kg/m2 or less.
REFERENCES
1. Hayashi K, Nieckarz JA, Thabit G III, et al. Effect
of nonablative laser energy on the joint capsule: an
in vivo rabbit study using a holmium:YAG laser.
Lasers Surg Med 1997;20(2):164–71.
2. Hantash BM, Ubeid AA, Chang H, et al. Bipolar frac-
tional radiofrequency treatment induces neoelasto-
genesis and neocollagenesis. Lasers Surg Med
2009;41(1):1–9.
3. Glich RE, White MW, Slayton MH, et al. Clinical pilot
study of intense ultrasound therapy to deep dermal
facial skin and subcutaneous tissues. Arch Facial
Plast Surg 2007;9:88–95.
4. Suh DH, Shin MK, Lee SJ, et al. Intense focused
ultrasound tightening in Asian skin: clinical and
pathologic results. Dermatol Surg 2011;37:1–8.
5. Goldberg DJ, Hornfeldt CS. Safety and efficacy of
microfocused ultrasound to lift, tighten, and smooth
the buttocks. Dermatol Surg 2014;40:1113–7.
6. Pak CS, Lee YK, Jeong JH, et al. Safety and efficacy
of Ulthera in the rejuvenation of the aging lower
eyelids: a pivotal clinical trial. Aesthetic Plast Surg
2014;38:861–8.
7. Suh DH, Oh YJ, Lee SJ, et al. Intense-focused ultra-
sound tightening for the treatment of infraorbital
laxity. J Cosmet Laser Ther 2012;14:290–5.
8. Alam M, White LE, Martin N, et al. Ultrasound tight-
ening of facial and neck skin: a rater-blinded pro-
spective cohort study. J Am Acad Dermatol 2010;
62:262–9.
9. White WM, Makin IRS, Barthe PG, et al. Selective
creation of thermal injury zones in the superficial
musculoaponeurotic system using intense ultra-
sound therapy. Arch Facial Plast Surg 2007;9:22–9.
10. Alster TA, Tanzi EL. Noninvasive lifting of the arm,
thigh, and knee skin with transcutaneous intense
focusedultrasound.Dermatol Surg2012;38(5):754–9.
11. Chan NPY, Shek SYN, Yu CS, et al. Safety study
of
transcutaneous focused ultrasound for
non-
invasive skin tightening in Asians. Lasers Surg Med
2011;43:366–75.
12. Ulthera Update White Paper. Comfort management.
13. Hitchcock TM, Dobke MK. Review of the safety pro-
file for microfocused ultrasound with visualization.
J Cosmet Dermatol 2014;13:329–35.
14. Ulthera Update White Paper. Lower face, submen-
tum, neck.
15. Lee HS, Jang WS, Cha YJ, et al. Multiple pass ultra-
sound tightening of skin laxity of the lower face and
neck. Dermatol Surg 2011;38(1):20–7.
16. Oni G, Hoxworth R, Teotia S, et al. Evaluation of a
microfocused ultrasound system for improving skin
laxity and tightening in the lower face. Aesthet
Surg J 2015;34:1099–110.
17. Ulthera Update White Paper. Treatment density.
Gutowski
582
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Seoul National University Hospital from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on July 27, 
2023. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

